

Japan, Peru take tough stand on guerrilla demands. Walker Simon



Japan and Peru on Saturday took a tough stand on rebel demands in the Lima hostage crisis, but their accord was swiftly rejected by the guerrillas holding 72 captives in the Japanese ambassador's residence.

At an emergency summit in Toronto, the leaders of both nations agreed to push for direct talks with the rebels, even though they ruled out the guerrillas' non-negotiable demand -- freedom for their jailed comrades.

" There will be absolutely no release of MRTA (Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement) prisoners, " Peru's President Alberto Fujimori told a news conference after the two-hour closed meeting, held on the 46th day of the hostage crisis.

The summit communique underscored Japan's support: " Prime Minister Ryutaro Hashimoto supported President Fujimori in his rejection of the MRTA's demand for the release of the MRTA terrorists currently in incarceration. "

As late as Friday, Hashimoto, according to a Japanese government source, differed with Fujimori's flat rejection of the rebel demand.

Saying the crisis was at a delicate stage and voicing fear of bloodshed, Hashimoto sought to soften Fujimori's position and put the rebel demand on the agenda to push negotiations forward, the source said.

A Japanese official told Reuters after the summit that " the biggest achievement of the summit was the agreement to promote the opening of preliminary dialogue between the Peruvian government and the MRTA group. "

The next biggest achievement was the naming of a Japanese envoy to the mediating committee, he said. Hashimoto said this would allow Tokyo to play a role in resolving the standoff.

Fujimori arrived in Washington later on Saturday ahead of talks scheduled on Monday with Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and other senior U.S. officials.

The hostage crisis erupted on Dec. 17 when MRTA rebels stormed the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima during a garden party honouring the Japanese emperor's birthday.

The leader of the operation, MRTA leader Nestor Cerpa, on Saturday appeared to dash any hopes of a quick settlement.

Soon after the summit's end, he reiterated that rebels would release their captives only after 400 jailed comrades were freed.

" We have come for one goal and we will not renounce it, " he told the CBS Telenoticas network from inside the mined and booby-trapped mission.

" Until now the hypothesis that has been mentioned is a peaceful solution but one without concession, " Cerpa said. " That signifies that it is the MRTA that has to concede. That will never happen. We will not step back. "

Most of the 500 or so initial hostages have been released.

The MRTA has kept those considered the best bargaining chips, including 25 Japanese businessmen and diplomats and prominent Peruvians such as Fujimori's brother Pedro and two Cabinet ministers, generals and security chiefs.

Fujimori and Hashimoto pledged to place the lives of the captives as their top priority in seeking a peaceful resolution to the hostage standoff.

Peru and Japan agreed that Japan's ambassador to Mexico would be appointed to the committee trying to negotiate a peaceful end to the standoff, giving Japan a direct role for the first time.

" Ambassador Terusuke Terada may be asked for advice and from that vantage point as well, as we engage in joint efforts, I'm sure that there will be some role we can play, " Hashimoto said.

But he voiced full confidence at the summit in Fujimori's handling of the crisis.

Fujimori told the news conference that Peruvian police would not continue their campaign of provoking the rebels.

" I assured him (Hashimoto) such acts will not be repeated, " Fujimori said.

He said the police action on Tuesday, which drew MRTA fire, was untimely and inappropriate " and therefore we should like to see that such acts will not be repeated. "

Peruvian police this week repeatedly rolled past the embassy in armoured vehicles making lewd gestures at the compound and blasting martial music from speakers at odd hours in an attempt to wear down the guerrillas' resistance.

Fujimori, the son of Japanese immigrants, has a hawkish reputation against guerrilla movements, built mainly on his record of crushing the Maoist Shining Path rebel movement. He has vowed to wipe out " terrorism " in Peru.

The two leaders attended a post-summit lunch hosted by Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien.






