
                
              
    Economy:
@  Washington, an Exchange Ally, Seems
@  To Be Strong Candidate to Head SEC
@  ----
@  By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and David Wessel
@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal 
          
                                  
 WASHINGTON 


Consuela Washington, a longtime House staffer and
an expert in securities laws, is a leading candidate to be
chairwoman of the Securities and Exchange Commission in the Clinton
administration.


Ms. Washington, 44 years old, would be the first woman and the
first black to head the five-member commission that oversees the
securities markets.


Ms. Washington's candidacy is being championed by several
powerful lawmakers including her boss, Chairman John Dingell (D.,
Mich.) of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. She currently is
a counsel to the committee. Ms. Washington and Mr. Dingell have been
considered allies of the securities exchanges, while banks and
futures exchanges have often fought with them.


A graduate of Harvard Law School, Ms. Washington worked as a
laywer for the corporate finance division of the SEC in the late
1970s. She has been a congressional staffer since 1979.


Separately, Clinton transition officials said that Frank Newman,
50, vice chairman and chief financial officer of BankAmerica Corp.,
is expected to be nominated as assistant Treasury secretary for
domestic finance. Mr. Newman, who would be giving up a job that pays
$1 million a year, would oversee the Treasury's auctions of
government securities as well as banking issues. He would report
directly to Treasury Secretary-designate Lloyd Bentsen.


Mr. Bentsen, who headed the Senate Finance Committee for the past
six years, also is expected to nominate Samuel Sessions, the
committee's chief tax counsel, to one of the top tax jobs at
Treasury.


As early as today, the Clinton camp is expected to name five
undersecretaries of state and several assistant secretaries. Peter
Tarnoff, a former Carter administration official and president of
the Council on Foreign Relations, is expected to be named
undersecretary for political affairs. Former Sen. Tim Wirth is
expected to get a newly created undersecretary post for global
affairs, which would include refugees, drugs and environmental
issues. Earlier, the Colorado Democrat had been a leading contender
to head the Environmental Protection Agency.


In addition, Joan Spero, an executive vice president of American
Express Co., is a leading candidate for undersecretary for economic
affairs. And Time magazine columnist Strobe Talbott is to be named
ambassador-at-large to coordinate U.S. policy toward the former
Soviet Union.


Several appointees of President Bush are likely to stay in office
at least temporarily, until permanent successors can be named. One
is Bernadine Healy, director of the National Institutes of Health.
Another likely holdover is David Kessler, head of the Food and Drug
Administration.


In the offfice of U.S. Trade Representative-designate Mickey
Kantor, selections for the three deputy trade representative slots
and general counsel are still to be decided. But Robert Kyle, the
Senate Finance Committee's trade counsel, is considered a top
candidate for one of the slots or for a trade post elsewhere in the
government.


For many subcabinet jobs, the list of candidates has been
narrowed considerably. Clinton officials are said to be deciding
between recently retired Rep. Matthew McHugh (D., N.Y.) and
environmental activist and transition official Gus Speth for the
director of the Agency for International Development.


Among others expected to be hired include Kitty Higgins, an aide
to Michigan Rep. Sander Levin, as chief of staff in the Labor
Department, while Jerry Palast of the Service Employees
International Union is expected to be the department's director of
legislative affairs.


Separately, the incoming Clinton administration is seriously
considering moving the briefing room for the press, for decades
situated in the West Wing of the White House, out of the White House
and into the Old Executive Office Building next door. The current
briefing room could be used for staff offices.


